## Abstract {.page_break_before}

As both sequencing technologies and data have proliferated, the bottleneck of biological sequence analysis has shifted from data generation to analysis. 


The emergence of workflow systems designed for bioinformatics has altered the landscape of ...

Fortunately, analysis tools and techniques have evolved to cope with this ever-increasing flood of data. 
Reliable and user-friendly workflow systems and software management have emerged to facilitate interrogation of many thousands of samples. 
For fundamental steps such as quality control, standardized protocols are now available meaning researchers can spend less time rewriting common analyses and more time examining the biological intricacies of their data. 
In cases where the data are too large for even high-performance computing environments, a series of tools have emerged that are capable of using small, representative subsets of massive datasets to produce comparable results. 
While adoption of these tools can both facilitate and expedite reproducible data analysis, knowledge of and training in these techniques is still lacking. 

Here, we provide insight on workflow systems that have emerged to fill the gap for biologists....

Here, we provide a series of tips, tools, and "good enough" practices for biologists venturing into the realm of biological sequence analysis.
The guidelines and tools presented below are designed to apply to novel or publicly-available sequencing data sets and across the range of computational resource options available to researchers.

The majority of this manuscript will covers understanding how to conduct computational analyses on sequencing data, 
Except for data acquisition, the tools and guidelines presented below apply to either novel or publicly-available data.  

