## Introduction

- paragraph = data deluge! computational analyses are long and hard, and historically have been piecemeal
Ecology = deluge of sensor data! == not just seq data (though I think the ecological data solutions are likely different/ more on Ethan White's Data management paper[@doi:10.1101/344804])

- paragraph = best practices and FAIR data goals! we all agree things should be reproducible, especially for computational analyses./ there's no reason for computational analyses _not_ to be reproducible

- paragraph: goals of workflow systems? data-centric software architecture
   - needs of data science different than previous software design
- paragraph: workflow systems in practice? idk, porobs 2 pparagraphs re workflows
  workflow systems emerged to deal with these issues, but are just now converging/ getting to user-friendly status.
  have converged around a few rule-based systems and are now life changing
  - here's how they work, in brief, and why they are life-changing/everyone should use them
  - community/open resources driving development and adoption
  - open science driving this...(?)
  - workflow systems are actually easier, too. here we try to present tips and "good enough practices for workflow systems"  many best practices are easier now with workflows? More abstracted - don't need ot worry about bash, software installation, etc.


Biological analyses now often require at least as much computational analysis as they do field data collection and laboratory work [doesn't talk about computational biology... reword].

The field of genomics, in particular, has experienced a deluge of high-throughput sequencing data that has already revolutionized our understanding of the diversity and function of organisms and communities, building basic understanding from ecosystems to human health.
The biological analyses used to produce these insights often span hundreds of steps and involve a myriad of decisions ranging from small-scale tool and parameter choices to larger-scale decisions around computational experimental design and statistical analyses.
Each step relies not only upon code written by the user, but on software, its dependencies, and the compute infrastructure and operating system on which the code is executed.
Historically, this has led to a lack of interoperability of pipelines and compute systems and difficulties with reproducibility [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x].

The conversation around best practices for biological analysis workflows in ongoing. As sequencing analysis has matured over the past decade, several papers have presented "best" or "good enough" practices for computational biological analyses [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001745; @doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002303; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510].
These recommendations have both helped build consensus and fueled additional tool and workflow development.
Since the latest paper in 2017 [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510], key advancements in workflow scripting, software management, and tools that handle biological data at scale have vastly increased the power of analysis management.
In particular, the emergence of bioinformatics-focused workflow systems has empowered biologists to analyze biological data at scale.


Biological analyses often span hundreds of steps and involve a myriad of decisions ranging from small-scale tool and parameter choices to larger-scale decisions around computational experimental design and statistical analyses.
These analyses not only rely upon code written by the user, but on software, its dependencies, and the compute infrastructure and operating system on which the code is executed.



A rich community of workflow management systems has matured over the last decade, ushering in advances across workflow systems that are tailored to the needs of specific communities [@doi:10.1016/j.future.2017.05.041].
Modern workflow systems separate analysis code written by the user from software and compute infrastructure, but manage and integrate both pieces [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x].
This approach improves interoperability and therefore repeatability of workflows encoded in workflow sytems.
Further, convergence on rule-based workflow specification means code is inherently modular and easily transferable between projects [@doi:10.1007/s00778-005-0153-9; @doi:10.1016/j.future.2017.05.041].
This means the upfront cost of specifying a workflow in a system is mitigated as this code is reused, leading to faster time-to-insight [@doi:10.1016/j.future.2017.05.041; @doi:10.1007/s41019-017-0050-4].
In concert, sharing of data analysis lessons and workflows has created a critical mass of analysis code now openly available for research and training, including that done by nonprofit organizations such as the Carpentries [@doi:10.2218/ijdc.v10i1.351].
This code can be easily reused and modified to accomodate advances in bioinformatics across diverse workflow system applications, further improving efficiency [@doi:10.1007/s41019-017-0050-4].

Taken together, modern workflow management systems enable fully-contained workflows to be automated, scaleable, robust to software updates, and executable across platforms.
These workflow systems have quickly become the workhorses of modern bioinformatics, empowering researchers to execute dozens of analysis tools in a systematic manner across all experimental samples.
In our experiences with both research and training, workflow systems have greatly reduced the barrier to entry for data analysis at scale and opened the door to end-to-end reproducibility.
Here, we present some tools, strategies, and "good enough" practices for leveraging workflow systems to streamline data-intensive biology and to enhance the documentation, automation and reproducibility of your science.

### notes:

 Cereceda and Quinn discuss the challenges of learning and interacting with OSS from a graduate student perspective, many of which are broadly applicable to biological researchers at any stage [@doi:10.1139/facets-2019-0020].

Shade and Teal provide a roadmap to help users get started with data-intensive biology [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002303] ... talk about this separately = very useful even now.
