## Data and resource management for workflow-enabled biology

Advancements in sequencing technologies have greatly increased the volume of data available for biological query [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sragrowth/].
Workflow systems, by virtue of automating many of the time-intensive project management steps traditionally required for data-intensive biology, can increase our capacity for data analysis.
However, conducting biological analyses at this scale requires a coordinated approach to data and computational resource management.
Below, we provide recommendations for data acquisition, management, and quality control that have become especially important as the volume of data has increased.
Finally, we discuss securing and managing appropriate computational resources for the scale of your project.

### Managing large-scale datasets

Experimental design, finding or generating data, and quality control are quintessential parts of data intensive biology.
There is no substitute for taking the time to properly design your analysis, identify appropriate data, and conduct sanity checks on your files.
While these tasks are not automatable, many tools and databases can aid in these processes.

#### Look for appropriate publicly-available data

With vast amounts of sequencing data already available in public repositories, it is often possible to begin investigating your research question by seeking out publicly available data.
In some cases, these data will be sufficient to conduct your entire analysis.
In others cases, particularly for biologists conducting novel experiments, these data can inform decisions about sequencing type, depth, and replication, and can help uncover potential pitfalls before they cost valuable time and resources.

Most journals now require data for all manuscripts to be made accessible, either at publication or after a short moratorium.
Further, the FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable) data movement has improved the data sharing ecosystem for data-intensive biology [@doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.18; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1097; @doi:10.1128/AEM.01444-19; @doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1491-4; @doi:10.1016/j.molp.2018.07.005; @doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8; @doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8; @doi:10.1093/nar/gky995].
You can find relevant sequencing data either by starting from the "data accessibility" sections of papers relevant to your research or by directly searching for your organism, environment, or treatment of choice in public data portals and repositories.
The International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC), which includes the Sequence Read Archive (SRA), European Nucleotide Archive (ENA), and DataBank of Japan (DDBJ) is the largest repository for raw sequencing data, but no longer accepts sequencing data from large consortia projects [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1323].
These data are instead hosted in consortia-specific databases, which may require some domain-specific knowledge for identifying relevant datasets and have unique download and authentication protocols.
For example, raw data from the Tara Oceans expedition is hosted by the Tara Ocean Foundation [@doi:10.1038/sdata.2015.23].
Additional curated databases focus on processed data instead, such as gene expression in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [@doi:10.1093/nar/30.1.207].
Organism-specific databases such as **Wormbase** (*Caenorhabditis elegans*) specialize on curating and integrating sequencing and other data associated with a model organism [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz920].
Finally, rather than focusing on certain data types or organisms, some repositories are designed to hold any data and metadata associated with a specific project or manuscript (e.g. Open Science Framework, Dryad, Zenodo [@doi:10.5195/JMLA.2017.88]).

#### Consider analysis when generating your own data

If generating your own data, proper experimental design and planning are essential.
For cost-intensive sequencing data, there are a range of decisions about experimental design and sequencing (including sequencing type, sequencing depth per sample, and biological replication) that impact your ability to properly address your research question.
Conducting discussions with experienced bioinformaticians and statisticians, **prior to beginning your experiments** if possible, is the best way to ensure you will have sufficient statistical power to detect effects.
These considerations will be different for different types of sequence analysis.
To aid in early project planning, we have curated a series of domain-specific references that may be useful as you go about designing your experiment (see **Table @tbl:seq_resources**).
Given the resources invested in collecting samples for sequencing, it's important to build in a buffer to preserve your experimental design in the face of unexpected laboratory or technical issues.
Once generated, it is always a good idea to have multiple independent backups of raw sequencing data, as it typically cannot be easily regenerated if lost to computer failure or other unforeseeable events.

|  Sequencing type | Resources |
| --- | --- |
|  RNA-sequencing | [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8; @doi:10.1261/rna.058339.116; @doi:10.1261/rna.046011.114] |
|  Metagenomic sequencing | [@doi:10.1038/nbt.2235; @doi:10.1038/nbt.3935; @doi:10.1016/j.tim.2018.11.003]|
|  Amplicon sequencing | [@doi:10.7554/eLife.46923; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0124671; @doi:10.1038/nbt.3981] |
|  Microbial isolate sequencing | [@doi:10.1038/srep08747] |
|  Eukaryotic genome sequencing | [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1720115115; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-1935-5; @doi:10.1134/S102279541705012X; @doi:10.12688/f1000research.13598.1] |
|  Whole-genome resequencing | [@doi:10.1111/mec.14264] |
|  RAD-sequencing | [@doi:10.1111/2041-210X.12700;@doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.00533; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2015.28; @doi:10.1111/1755-0998.12669; @doi:10.1111/1755-0998.12677; @doi:10.1111/2041-210X.12700] |
|  single cell RNA-seq | [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0927-y; @doi:10.1186/s13073-017-0467-4] |

Table: References for experimental design and considerations for common sequencing chemistries. {#tbl:seq_resources}

As your experiment progresses, keep track of as much information as possible: dates and times of sample collection, storage, and extraction, sample names, aberrations that occurred during collection, kit lot used for extraction, and any other sample and sequencing measurements you might be able to obtain (temperature, location, metabolite concentration, name of collector, well number, plate number, machine your data was sequenced, on etc).
This metadata allows you to keep track of your samples, to control for batch effects that may arise from unintended batching during sampling or experimental procedures and makes the data you collect reusable for future applications and analysis by yourself and others.
Wherever possible, follow the standard guidelines for formatting metadata for scientific computing to limit downstream processing and simplify analyses requiring these metadata (see: [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510]).
We have focused here on sequencing data; for data management over long-term ecological studies, we recommend [@doi:10.1101/344804].


### Getting started with sequencing data

#### Protect valuable data

Aside from the code itself, raw data are the most important files associated with a workflow, as they cannot be regenerated if accidentally altered or deleted.
Keeping a read-only copy of raw data alongside a workflow as well multiple backups protects your data from accidents and computer failure.
This also removes the imperative of storing intermediate files as these can be easily regenerated by the workflow.

When sharing or storing files and results, data version control can keep track of differences in files such as changes from tool parameters or versions.
The version control tools discussed in the [Workflow-based project management](## workflow-based-project-management) section are primarily designed to handle small files, but repositories such as the Open Science Framework, Figshare, Zenodo, and Dryad can be used for storing larger files and datasets.

The Open Science Framework (OSF; [@doi:10.5195/JMLA.2017.88]) is a free service that provides powerful collaboration and sharing tools, provides built-in version control, integrates with other storage and version control repositories, guarantees data preservation, and enables you to keep projects private until they are ready to share. Like other services geared towards data sharing, OSF also enables generation of a digital object identifier (doi) for each project.
While other services such as Git Large File Storage (LFS), Figshare [@url:https://figshare.com/], Zenodo [@url:https://zenodo.org/], and the Dryad Digital Repository [@url:https://datadryad.org/] each provide important services for sharing and version control, OSF provides the most comprehensive set of free tools for managing data storage and backup.
As free tools often limit the size of files that can be stored, a number of cloud backup and storage services are also available for purchase or via university contract, including Google Drive, Box, Dropbox, Amazon Web Services, and Backblaze. Full computer backups can be conducted to these storage locations with tools like rclone [@doi:10.1111/2041-210X.12550].

#### Ensure data integrity during transfers

If you're working with publicly-available data, you may be able to work on a compute system where the data are already available, circumventing time and effort required for downloading and moving the data.
Databases such as the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) are now available on commercial cloud computing systems, and open source projects such as Galaxy enable working with SRA sequence files directly from a web browser [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky379; @url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/sra-cloud/].
Ongoing projects such as the NIH Common Fund Data Ecosystem aim to develop a data portal to make NIH Common Fund data, including biomedical sequencing data, more findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR).

In most cases, you'll still need to transfer some data - either downloading raw data or transferring important intermediate and results files for backup and sharing (or both).
Transferring compressed files (gzip, bzip2, BAM/CRAM, etc.) can improve transfer speed and save space, and checksums can be used to to ensure file integrity after transfer (see **Figure @fig:checksum**).

![**Use Checksums to ensure file integrity** Checksum programs (e.g. md5, sha256) encode file size and content in a single value known as a "checksum". For any given file, this value will be identical across platforms when calculated using the same checksum program. When transferring files, calculate the value of the checksum prior to transfer, and then again after transfer. If the value is not identical, there was an error introduced during transfer (e.g. file truncation, etc). Checksums are often provided alongside publicly available files, so that you can verify proper download. Tools like rsync and rclone that automate file transfers use checksums internally to verify that files were transferred properly, and some GUI file transfer tools (e.g. Cyberduck) can assess checksums when they are provided [@doi:10.1111/2041-210X.12550, @url:https://cyberduck.io/]. If you generated your own data and receieved sequencing files from a sequencing center, be certain you also receive a checksum for each of your files to ensure they download properly.
](images/checksum_file.svg){#fig:checksum height=2.5in}

#### Perform quality control at every step

The quality of your input data has a major impact on the quality of the output results, no matter whether your workflow analyzes six samples or six hundred.
Assessing data at every analysis step can reveal problems and errors early, before they waste valuable time and resources.
Using quality control tools that provide metrics and visualizations can help you assess your datasets, particularly as the size of your input data scales up.
However, data from different species or sequencing types can produce anomalous quality control results.
You are ultimately the single most effective quality control tool that you have, so it is important to critically assess each metric to determine those that are relevant for your particular data.

**Look at your files**
Quality control can be as simple as looking at the first few and last few lines of input and output data files, or checking the size of those files (see **Table @tbl:bash_commands**).
To develop an intuition for what proper inputs and outputs look like for a given tool, it is often helpful to first run the test example or data that is packaged with the software.
Comparing these input and output file formats to your own data can help identify and address inconsistencies.

|  command | function | example |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  ls -lh | list files with information in a human-readable format | ls -lh \*fastq.gz |
|  head | print the first 6 lines of a file to standard out | head samples.csv |
|  tail | print the last 6 lines of a file to standard out | tail samples.csv |
|  less | show the contents of a file in a scrollable screen | less samples.csv |
|  zless | show the contents of a gzipped file in a scrollable screen | zless sample1.fastq.gz |
|  wc -l | count the number of lines in a file | wc -l ecoli.fasta |
|  cat | print a file to standard out | cat samples.csv |
|  grep | find matching text and print the line to standard out | grep ">" ecoli.fasta |
|  cut | cut columns from a table | cut -d"," -f1 samples.csv |
Table: Some bash commands are useful to quickly explore the contents of a file. By using these commands, the user can detect common formatting problems or other abnormalities. {#tbl:bash_commands}

**Visualize your data**
Visualization is another powerful way to pick out unusual or unexpected patterns.
Although large abnormalities may be clear from looking at files, others may be small and difficult to find.
Visualizing raw sequencing data with FastQC (**Figure {@fig:multiqc}A**) and processed sequencing data with tools like the Integrative Genome Viewer and plotting tabular results files using python or R can make aberrant or inconsistent results easier to track down [@url:https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/; @doi:10.1093/bib/bbs017].

![**Visualizations produced by MultiQC.**
MultiQC finds and automatically parses log files from other tools and generates a combined report and parsed data tables that include all samples. MultiQC currently supports 88 tools.
**A.** MultiQC summary of FastQC Per Sequence GC Content for 1905 metagenome samples. FastQC provides quality control measurements and visualizations for raw sequencing data from a single sample, and is a near-universal first step in sequencing data analysis because of the insights it provides  [@url:https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/; @doi:10.1093/bib/bbs017].
FastQC measures and summarizes 10 quality metrics and provides recommendations for whether an individual sample is within an acceptable quality range.  
Not all metrics readily apply to all sequencing data types. For example, while multiple GC peaks might be concerning in whole genome sequencing of a bacterial isolate, we would expect a non-normal distribution for some metagenome samples that contain organisms with diverse GC content.
Samples like this can be seen in red in this figure.
**B.** MultiQC summary of Salmon *quant* reads mapped per sample for RNA-seq samples [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197]. In this figure, we see that MultiQC summarizes the number of reads mapped and percent of reads mapped, two values that are reported in the Salmon log files.
](images/multiqc_viz.svg){#fig:multiqc}

**Pay attention to warnings and log files**
Many tools generate log files or messages while running.
These files contain information about the quantity, quality, and results from the run, or error messages about why a run failed.
Inspecting these files can be helpful to make sure tools ran properly and consistently, or to debug failed runs.
Parsing and visualizing log files with a tool like MultiQC can improve interpretability of program-specific log files (**Figure @fig:multiqc** [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354]).

**Look for common biases in sequencing data**
Biases in sequencing data originate from experimental design, methodology, sequencing chemistry, or workflows, and are helpful to target specifically with quality control measures.
The exact biases in a specific data set or workflow will vary greatly between experiments so it is important to understand the sequencing method you have chosen and incorporate appropriate filtration steps into your workflow.
For example, PCR duplicates can cause problems in libraries that underwent an amplification step, and often need to be removed prior to downstream analysis [@doi:10.1038/nrg3788; @doi:10.1038/srep25533; @doi:10.1086/BBLv227n2p146; @doi:10.1186/s12864-018-4933-1; @doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0420-4].

**Check for contamination**
Contamination can arise during sample collection, nucleotide extraction, library preparation, or through sequencing spike-ins like PhiX, and could change data interpretation if not removed [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1510461112; @doi:10.1073/pnas.1600338113; @doi:10.1186/1944-3277-10-18].
Libraries sequenced with high concentrations of free adapters or with low concentration samples may have increased barcode hopping, leading to contamination between samples [@doi:10.1111/1755-0998.13009].

**Consider the costs and benefits of stringent quality control for your data**
Good quality data is essential for good downstream analysis.
However, stringent quality control can sometimes do more harm than good.
For example, depending on sequencing depth, stringent quality trimming of RNA-sequencing data may reduce isoform discovery [@doi:10.3389/fgene.2014.00013].
To determine what issues are most likely to plague your specific data set, it can be helpful to find recent publications using a similar experimental design, or to speak with experts at a sequencing core.

Because sequencing data and applications are so diverse, there is no one-size-fits-all solution for quality control.
It is important to think critically about the patterns you expect to see given your data and your biological problem, and consult with technical experts whenever possible.

### Securing and managing appropriate computational resources

Sequence analysis requires access to computing systems with adequate storage and analysis power for your data.
For some smaller-scale datasets, local desktop or even laptop systems can be sufficient, especially if using tools that implement data-reduction strategies such as minhashing [@doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0653-2].
However, larger projects require additional computing power, or may be restricted to certain operating systems (e.g. linux).
For these projects, solutions range from research-focused high performance computing systems to research-integrated commercial analysis platforms.
Both research-only and  and commercial clusters provide avenues for research and educational proposals to enable access to their computing resources (see **Table @tbl:computational_resources**).
In preparing for data analysis, be sure to allocate sufficient computational resources and funding for storage and analysis, including large intermediate files and resources required for personnel training.
Note that workflow systems can greatly facilitate faithful execution of your analysis across the range of computational resources available to you, including distribution across cloud computing systems.

|  Provider | Access Model | Restrictions |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  Amazon Web Services | Paid |  |
|  Bionimbus Protected Data Cloud | Research allocation | users with eRA commons account |
|  Cyverse Atmosphere | Free with limits | storage and compute hours |
|  EGI federated cloud | Access by contact | European partner countries |
|  Galaxy | Free with storage limits | data storage limits |
|  Google Cloud Platform | Paid |  |
|  Google Colab | Free | computational notebooks, no resource guarantees |
|  Microsoft Azure | Paid |  |
|  NSF XSEDE | Research allocation | USA researchers or collaborators |
|  Open Science Data Cloud | Research allocation |  |
|  Wasabi | Paid | data storage solution only |
Table: **Computing Resources** Bioinformatic projects often require additional computing resources. If a local or university-run high-performance computing cluster is not available, computing resources are available via a number of grant-based or commercial providers. {#tbl:computational_resources}

### Getting started with resource management

As the scale of data increases, the resources required for analysis can balloon.
Bioinformatic workflows can be long-running, require high-memory systems, or involve intensive file manipulation.
Some of the strategies below may help you manage computational resources for your project.

**Apply for research units if eligible**
There are a number of cloud computing services that offer grants providing computing resources to data-intensive researchers (**Table {@tbl:computational_resources}**). In some cases, the resources provided may be sufficient to cover your entire analysis.

**Develop on a local computer when possible**
Since workflows transfer easily across systems, it can be useful to develop individual analysis steps on a local laptop.
If the analysis tool will run on your local system, test the step with subsampled data, such as that created in the  [Getting started developing workflows](## getting-started-developing-workflows) section.
Once working, the new workflow component can be run at scale on a larger computing system.
Workflow system tool resource usage reporting can help determine the increased resources needed to execute the workflow on larger systems.
For researchers without access to free or granted computing resources, this strategy can save significant cost.

**Gain quick insights using sketching algorithms**
Understanding the basic structure of data, the relationship between samples, and the approximate composition of each sample can very helpful at the beginning of data analysis, and can often drive analysis decisions in different directions than those originally intended.
Although most bioinformatics workflows generate these types of insights, there are a few tools that do so rapidly, allowing the user to generate quick hypotheses that can be further tested by more extensive, fine-grained analyses.
Sketching algorithms work with compressed approximate representations of sequencing data and thereby reduce runtimes and computational resources.
These approximate representations retain enough information about the original sequence to recapitulate the main findings from many exact but computationally intensive workflows.
Most sketching algorithms estimate sequence similarity in some way, allowing you to gain insights from these comparisons.
For example, sketching algorithms can be used to estimate all-by-all sample similarity which can be visualized as a Principle Component Analysis or a multidimensional scaling plot, or can be used to build a phylogenetic tree with accurate topology.
Sketching algorithms also dramatically reduce the runtime for comparisons against databases (e.g. all of GenBank), allowing users to quickly compare their data against large public databases.

Rowe 2019 [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1809-x] reviewed programs and genomic use cases for sketching algorithms, and provided a series of tutorial workbooks (e.g. Sample QC notebook: [@url:https://github.com/will-rowe/genome-sketching/blob/master/notebooks/r4.1.Sample-QC.ipynb]).

**Use the right tools for your question**
RNA-seq analysis approaches like differential expression or transcript clustering rely on transcript or gene counts.
Many tools can be used to generate these counts by quantifying the number of reads that overlap with each transcript or gene.
For example, tools like STAR and HISAT2 produce alignments that can be post-processed to generate per-transcript read counts [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635; @doi:10.1038/s41587-019-0201-4].
However, these tools generate information-rich output, specifying per-base alignments for each read.
If you are only interested in read quantification, quasi-mapping tools provide the desired results while reducing the time and resources needed to generate and store read count information [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3519; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw277].

**Seek help when you need it**
In some cases, you may find that your accessible computing system is ill-equipped to handle the type or scope of your analysis.
Depending on the system, staff members may be able to help direct you to properly scale your workflow to available resources, or guide you in tailoring computational unit allocations or purhcases to match your needs.
