## Troubleshooting strategically
 - strategic troubleshooting? troubleshooting strategies? workflow troubleshooting? other better title?

The nature of research software (including workflow system software) means that it is often undergoing its own iterative development process to better address the research questions and user needs at hand.
For users, this can be an incredible advantage.
Tools under active development are likely to improve software efficiency, add new features, improve user interaction and documentation, and be responsive to queries.
However, functionality may change as developers build their software, and despite best efforts, documentation can get out of date [@doi:10.1007/s10606-018-9333-1].
On top of this, it is difficult to grok code and usage errors while unfamiliar with a tool or its underlying language or syntax, especially for researchers without computational training [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005755].
As a result, workflows will invariably require troubleshooting and iteration, often even while running test datasets associated with analysis software.
The challenges of learning and interacting with research software -- from coding languages to workflow systems to analysis -- require time and patience [@doi:10.1139/facets-2019-0020].

One of the largest barriers is learning how, when, and where to ask for help.
Below we outline a strategy for troubleshooting that can help build your own knowledge while respecting both your own time and that of research software developers and the larger bioinformatic community.
In the "where to seek help" section, we also recommend a few locations for asking more general questions around data-intensive analysis, including discussion of tool choice, parameter selection, and other analysis strategies.
Beyond these tips, workshops and materials from training organizations such as the Carpentries can arm you with the tools you need to get troubleshoot and jump-start software and data literacy in your community [doi:10.2218/ijdc.v10i1.351]

### How to help yourself: Try to pinpoint your issue or error

The first step, of course, is to try to narrow down the source of your error.
First - are you (or did you try) running the example or test data, using their exact code?
It is critical to know that the software works on your system before trying to use your own data and modifications.
Then, look for an error message.
Most of the time, the software will emit an error message with information that will help you understand the issue you triggered.
If there is no error message or it is not clear, first run the software's help (usually accessible on the command line via `tool-name --help`) to check that you've specified all the arguments with the correct syntax.
Syntax errors are extremely common/easy to make, and typos as small as a single, difficult to spot, misplaced character can affect the code.
Then look to the program's documentation, which will usually contain additional information and use case examples. Note that if there is a syntax discrepancy between the `--help` message and official documentation, the `--help` message is more likely to be correct, as it is tied to the codebase itself. Some documentation can be generated directly from code, but most is written separately by software developers, and is more likely to get out of date.
Best practices for software development follow "semantic versioning" principles, which aim to keep the arguments and functionality the same for all minor releases of the program (e.g. 1.1 to 1.2) and only change functions with major releases (e.g. 1.x to 2.0).
Pay attention to the version information (often accessible at the command line `tool-name --version`), and ensure that the syntax you are using is accurate for the program version.

Once you've verified that your syntax is correct, it's time to look further into the error message.
In many cases, the error you've encountered has been encountered many times before, and properly searching for the error online can turn up a working solution.
If there is a GitHub/GitLab/Bitbucket issue tracker for the software, a Gitter or google groups page, or any other online community and resources for the tool, search there first with the error code or informative text.
If nothing comes up, move to googling the error, but note that the search terms you choose are very important.
At minimum, you'll want to include the name of the program, and the relevant error code or informative text.
Try several variants, and iteratively add information such as the type of data or analysis you're running, the name of the coding language or computational platform, and other relevant information.
There are a vast array of online resources for bioinformatic help ranging from question sites such as Stack Overflow and BioStars, to personal or academic blogs and even tutorials and lessons written by experts in the field [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002216].
Be sure to follow a few potentially informative links to see whether or not they contain a solution.
As you develop a sense for how to google errors, you may find that this is your best line of defense against errors/ best point of attack for troubleshooting!

### How to seek help: include the right details with your question

Once you've tried the strategies above and are unable to find the solution, it's time to escalate.
When asking for help, it's essential to provide the right details so that other users and developers can understand the exact conditions that triggered the error.
At minimum, you will need the name and version of the program, the method you used to install it, whether or not the test data ran, the exact code you're running, the error message, and the full output text from the run (if anything additional).
You may also need to specify the type and version of the operating system you're using.
If the answers indicate that error may reveal a bug in the underlying code, you may need to specify or provide the minimum amount of data (yours or test data) required to trigger the error, as this will enable advanced users and developers to debug.
Putting the effort into gathering this information both increases your own understanding of the problem and makes it easier and faster for users and developers to help solve your issue.
Furthermore, it signals respect for the time that these developers and community members dedicate to helping troubleshoot and solve user issues.

### Where to seek help: online and local communities of practice

With the proper information in hand, where do you ask?

**Online communities and forums**
For errors with specific programs, often the best place to post is the developers' preferred location for answering questions and solving errors related to their program.
For open source programs on GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket, this is often the "Issues" tab within the software repository, but it could alternatively be a google groups list, Gitter page, or other specified forum - check the documentation.
If question is more general, such as asking about program choice or workflows, forums relevant to your field such as Stack Overflow or BioStars are good choices, as posts here are often seen by a diverse array of researchers in the field.
Before posting, search through related topics to double check your question has not already been answered.
As more research software development and troubleshooting is happening openly in online repositories, it is becoming more important than ever to follow a code of conduct that promotes open and harrassment-free discussion environment [@doi:10.1109/SANER.2017.7884606].
Look for codes of conduct in the online forums you participate in, and make sure you do your part to help ensure a welcoming community for participants of all backgrounds and computational competencies.

**Local communities of practice**
While there is lots of help available online, there's no substitute for local communities where you can get help working with your data and learning to troubleshoot.
Many people around you may be experiencing similar issues and finding it difficult to find appropriate help.
In addition to fostering local collaboration, developing a local bioinformatics community can provide a safe and active forum for your community to ask and answer questions related to their research.
Getting started building this sort of community (discussed in detail in [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2005561]), can be as simple as hosting a seminar series or starting meetup sessions for data analysis co-working.
In our experience, it can also be useful to set up a local online forum (e.g. discourse) for group troubleshooting.
While this may seem like just a local version of Stack Overflow, the local, member-only nature can help create a safe and collaborative online space for troubleshooting problems often encountered by your local bioinformatics community.
The benefit to beginners is clear: learning the best way to post questions and the important parts of errors, while getting questions answered so they can move forward in their research.
Intermediate users may actually find these communities most useful, as they can also accelerate their own troubleshooting skills by helping others solve issues that they have already struggled through.
While it can be helpful to have some experts available to help answer questions or to know when to escalate to Stack Overflow or other communities, a collaborative community of practice with members at all experience levels can help all its members move their science forward faster.
